Perimenopause:

Perimenopause usually starts sometime during a woman’s mid-40s and can last for several years (in some cases even longer, such as up to 10 years). It’s common during this time to experience irregular periods, breakthrough bleeding and other signs that reproductive hormones are shifting.

Perimenopause is the natural progression in life where you start to experience subtle hormonal declines in estrogen, progesterone, testosterone, DHEA and melatonin. You will also experience an increase in FSH (follicle stimulating hormone).  You may also have greater imbalances in thyroid function and cortisol levels during this time.  When you transitioned through puberty your hormones were on the rise, however during peri-menopause hormones are on the decline and because of this you can begin to experience uncomfortable menopausal symptoms. Both puberty and perimenopause are both normal stages of life where symptoms can be minimal if you know how to support your body. How you ate, moved and managed stress prior to peri-menopause is very different when hormones begin to decline.  With this in mind, you can’t put the same amount of pressure onto your body, nor eat the same volume of food, or exercise as hard, to see the results that you once did.

With this in mind, we recommend that you focus on the following:
Eat protein for breakfast every day, and emphasize it at every meal from diverse sources
Avoid ALL snacking
Consume less calories overall in order to maintain your weight as you get older. Due to a decrease in muscle mass and the slowing of your metabolism, it’s more important than ever protein foods, limit processed foods and focus on eating a clean diet.
Eat cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli, cauliflower, kale, cabbage as it contains indole 3 carbinol which naturally helps to balance estrogen levels. These veggies are also high in fiber, vitamin C, vitamin K and electrolytes which are important for blood pressure and heart health.
Eat a phytoestrogen-plant based rich diet to counteract the effects of the hormonal imbalances. Include flaxseeds, oats, sesame seeds, apples, and grated carrots.
Eat phytonutrients by eating the rainbow of different whole food colours everyday (red, orange, yellow, green, blue-purple).
Include plenty of essential minerals and healthy anti-inflammatory omega 3 fats such as fish, seafood, nuts, seeds, leafy greens, and flaxseed oil. By filling up on foods which are “hormone-balancing,” nutrient-dense and unprocessed can help you eliminate your intake of empty calories and manage weight gain.
Eat fibre to balance your production of estrogen. Best sources include nuts, seeds, legumes/beans, avocado, veggies and fruit.
Reduce your stress and guard your sleep - poor sleep is linked with higher levels of morning cortisol, decreased immunity, trouble with work performance, and a higher susceptibility to anxiety, weight gain and depression. To allow your body to recover from stress, control your appetite and improve energy, aim to get 7–9 hours of sleep every night.
Include probiotics into your diet.  These are healthy bacteria that improve your production and regulation of key hormones like insulin, ghrelin and leptin. They’re even capable of raising immune function and protecting cognitive functioning. The best probiotic foods include yogurt, kefir, cultured veggies such as sauerkraut or kimchi, kombucha and other fermented foods.
The restorative exercise program is highly recommended (build muscle mass through resistance training 2-3 times per week and increase cardiovascular fitness 1-2 times weekly) to improve body weight, sleep quality, insomnia, bone density, muscle mass and inflammation.
